1. Installing FREENAS / TRUENAS on VMWARE
 Download the TrueNAS/FreeNAS installation ISO ( TrueNAS-13.3-U1.2.iso).
 Start VMware and create a new virtual machine.
 Pick the Typical setup option.
 Choose Use ISO image and browse to the downloaded TrueNAS ISO file.
 Set up the virtual disk size according to your needs.
 Choose the option to store the virtual disk as a single file.


 Click Next, then Finish to complete the VM setup.
 Adjust the hardware settings by opening Customize Hardware.
 Set the Network Adapter to NAT mode.
 Allocate 4 GB of memory for the virtual machine.

 When the virtual machine starts:
 Choose Install/Upgrade from the menu.
 Proceed with the default options by selecting Yes/OK when prompted.
 Pick the virtual disk you created as the installation target.
.
 Complete the installation and allow the VM to reboot.
 Set a root password when asked

2. Accessing the TrueNAS Web Dashboard
 After the system reboots, TrueNAS will show a LAN IP address on the console. 
Open a browser and enter that IP in the address bar.
 Log in using: Username: root
Password: the password you created during installation
251100680004
(It is recommended to shutdown truenas and restart the VM again and relogin to truenas)
3. Adding Two Virtual Hard Drives to the TrueNAS VM
 Open the VM settings by right-clicking the TrueNAS virtual machine and selecting
Settings.
 Choose Add → Hard Disk, then select SCSI as the disk type.
 Create a new virtual disk and set its size as needed.
 Enable Store virtual disk as a single file.
 Click Finish to add the disk.

4. Creating Two Storage Pools in the TrueNAS Dashboard
 After signing in to the TrueNAS web interface:
 Open the Storage menu.
 In the left sidebar, select Storage → Pools
 Creating Pool 1
 Click Add → Create New Pool

 Follow these steps:
 Enter the pool name: pool_1
 In the Available Disks section, the newly added virtual disks (e.g., da1, da2) will appear
 Select one disk and click Add to include it in the pool
 Click Create, then confirm to finish
 Click Add → Create New Pool
 Follow these steps:
 Enter the pool name: pool_2
 Select the other virtual disk
 Add the disk to the pool configuration
 Click Create, then confirm to complete the pool setup

 Now TrueNAS has two separate pools, each using a separate virtual disk as 
shown below.




5. WebDAV Configuration
 Creating a WebDAV Share
 Go to Sharing → WebDAV → Add
 Enter the required details:
 Name: myweb
 Directory: /mnt/pool_1/myweb
251100680004
 Enabling and Setting Up the WebDAV Service
 Open the Services section
 Enable the WebDAV service and configure it as follows:
 Authentication: None
 Protocol: HTTP
 Port: 8081
251100680004
 Now access myweb From Browser by pasting <truenasip>:8081/myweb


6. NFS Configuration and Mounting on TrueNAS
 Create an NFS Share
 Open Sharing → Unix Shares (NFS)
 Click Add
 Set the Path to:
/mnt/Pool2/LINUX
 Save the share and enable the NFS service if asked
251100680004
 Mount the NFS Share on Linux
 Run the following commands on your Terminal:
sudo mkdir /mnt/nfs_check
sudo mount -t nfs -o nfsvers=3 <truenas-ip>:/mnt/Pool2/LINUX /mnt/nfs_check
 Validation
 Create a dataset inside /mnt/Pool2/LINUX in the TrueNAS GUI
 Check the folder /mnt/nfs_check on the Linux system
 The newly created dataset should appear there, confirming the NFS share is 
working
251100680004

7. Windows (SMB) Sharing Configuration 
Create a User in TrueNAS
 Go to Accounts → Users → Add
 Enter the required details:
 Username: e.g., winuser
 Password: choose a secure password
 Select the appropriate directory and set permissions
 Click Submit to create the user
251100680004
Configure the SMB Service
 Open the Services section
 Enable SMB1 support if needed
 Under Advanced Options, set the newly created user as the Guest User
 Save the settings
251100680004
Create the SMB Share
 Navigate to Sharing → Windows Shares (SMB)
 Click Add
 Set the Path to:
/mnt/Pool2/WINDOWS
 Enable Allow Guest Access
 Click Save to create the share
251100680004
Setting Up the Windows Virtual Machine
 Download Windows 10 ISO
 Open VMware Workstation
Select the VM Configuration
 Choose Typical (Recommended)
 Under installation options, select Use ISO image
 Browse and choose the Windows 10 ISO file
251100680004
 Configure the Virtual Disk
 When setting up storage, select Store virtual disk as a single file
 Click Finish to complete the VM creation
 Start the Windows VM
 Power on the virtual machine to begin the Windows installation process
251100680004
Validating SMB Share from the Windows Machine
 Start the Windows VM
 Open File Explorer
 Right-click Network and select Map network drive
 In the path field, enter:
\\<truenas-ip>\<SMB_Share_Name>
 Uncheck the first option and choose Connect using different credentials
 When asked to sign in, enter:
 Username: winuser
 Password: the password you created
 This confirms that the SMB share is accessible from Windows.



